 Data Curation Final Paper: Pipelines and Their Limitations

 When curating messy data, the goal is often to reach a certain standard that reflects consistent formatting, no duplicates, valid values, complete fields, and many other requirements. While this goal can be attained through manually cleaning every individual dataset, it is often more productive to create a pipeline that addresses many common issues in data curation and that flags potential issues for review, producing a dataset that is tidy and ready for evaluation. Reflecting this, a data curation pipeline was created to perform this process and to produce cleaner data. Despite the potential efficiency and usefulness of data curation pipelines, however, they tend to be imperfect, particularly in broader application due to the unique issues that datasets may have and the limited ability to make inferences about unclear or inaccurate data entries.

 A key component of the process of creating pipelines is ensuring that the correct issues are being addressed so that the resulting pipeline is as tidy as possible. Additionally, the issues that are chosen as a focus should generalize to many datasets without causing issues in those datasets due to the level of specialization. Before implementing the pipeline, the datasets that would be used were taken into account and two distinctly different datasets were selected in an effort to emphasize the versatility of the pipeline. The first dataset was from Kaggle with 110 columns and rows of data generated through participants who took an online test, and it included factors like participant answers to each question, screen width, screen height, and country. The second was from NYC Open Data and it included 44 columns and 1,017,111 rows with columns and the third was from Chicago Open Data and had 39 columns and 655,320 rows.

 Considering these datasets, the key components of data curation from the first component of the project became the main focus as these would be applied in a pipeline. These components included normalizing data types and formats, resolving or justifying the treatment of missing values, documenting transformations, and producing a cleaned dataset that is distinctive from the raw source. Given these components and the issues that the two datasets posed, the main issues that were addressed were whether required fields were filled, whether values in each category were valid, whether certain fields (such as zip code or phone number) followed the correct format, whether numeric fields fell within the correct range, whether there were duplicate IDs, and whether dates were in the correct format. These checks addressed key issues in data curation, but yielded flexibility that more dataset specific requirements would have limited. Additionally, users have the opportunity to address specific issues in new datasets by modifying the settings.yaml file in config. This allowed for a more personalized approach that addresses specific issues in files as mentioned above, further curating the data and enhancing the effectiveness of the pipeline. 

 After initially adding their datasets (in CSV format) under the raw folder and adjusting the settings in settings.yaml to best curate their data, users can then run main, allowing the pipeline to go through six key steps. The first of these is the ingest file, which loads the comma or tab separated file and raises an error if the file is not found. After this, the profiler file is run, recording total row count and total column count, duplicate rows, and unique values per column for the raw data. Next, the validator file checks the six key rules previously mentioned and the cleaner file fixes clear issues such as duplicate rows, lowercase, date format, and whitespace issues while flagging other fields for review. Lastly, the reporter file divides the data into clean and flagged rows, saving a clean CSV file for data that is clean according to the discussed standards and a file for flagged rows that the user can review later. There is also a report including the number of missing values per column and other useful information.

 Given this process for the pipeline, there were a few key curation decisions that were particularly difficult to encode. Specifically, working out the details for settings.yaml was difficult as it involved determining specific details for individual CSVs and creating a structure that is reusable for many datasets. Additionally, the validator file addressed the six rules and was complicated. The system reliably is able to drop duplicate rows, change columns to uppercase, reformat dates, remove whitespace, and flag other fields for review. Despite this, it is not able to make educated guesses for issues such as a missing borough in the NYC dataset and many data inconsistencies are flagged for review. 

 While the workflow was different for the second dataset, there were clear consistencies. For example, while the initial dataset addressed boroughs and ensured that each of the entries was either one of several boroughs or “unknown,” the Big Five dataset focused on whether the data for each column of Likert scale items had a minimum of one and an maximum of 5. Considering the significant number of items (fifty or so), only the first 5 were addressed in this case, but the data could be adjusted to address each item. Although some details needed to be changed in settings.yaml, the pipeline still processed the data, although perhaps with less efficiency.

 The system makes several assumptions, most notably that the file is comma or tab separated and that the data itself should not be pivoted to create cleaner rows and columns. Additionally, it checks for several key columns upon accepting the data, although these can be altered and customized for each dataset in settings.yaml. The pipeline is best suited for datasets that are similar to the service requests and that have a clear ID column so that the pipeline can check for duplicates, as well as columns that have several specific expected entries such that data not matching those entries can be filtered. Despite this, the Big Five dataset was filtered efficiently with potential for further improvements over time. The pipeline anticipates that the data will be somewhat well organized and formatted for intake.

 Despite its functionality, certain risks of bias, erasure, and false confidence remain as the pipeline filters data. Firstly, the pipeline deletes duplicate keys, which may cause issues if a different row of data is mistakenly given the same key as another. The zip code (if there is one) is also reformatted with the assumption that it is a five digit code while input from another dataset may correctly reflect a different number of digits. If other datasets that are significantly different from the datasets that the pipeline is built for are entered, data may be erased in a variety of fields. Another issue is human error as those listing requirements for the pipeline in settings.yaml may incorrectly spell a value or may cause a different function than what is intended to occur. Considering these, human error and accidental deletions are the main potential issues for the pipeline.

 Before the system could be used professionally or organizationally, it would need to become more generalizable to other datasets or more specialized to the datasets that the organization would want to clean. Additionally, an interface for the settings folder could be created to make adjusting the requirements for filtering the dataset more user friendly, simple, and clear. This interface could allow users to input each requirement with clear instructions and explanations of what would happen. A description of the pipeline, both with more comments in the code and more explanations in the interface would allow users to add and process their own data with greater ease. More filters, such as a function to remove or flag outliers without manually specifying the range for each column, would be useful as well, contributing to a better pipeline. 
 
 Overall, the pipeline cleaned, dropped, and flagged data, creating a cleaner and more usable dataset. Despite this, a variety of features could be modified and added to increase efficiency and ease of use for end users. The pipeline served as an initial step for cleaning data, automating processes that would otherwise take considerable time and preparing the dataset for human review in the future.
 